packages/stl/README.md, before:

# @stl-api/stl: Stainless server and client framework

Stainless helps you ship quality, typesafe REST APIs from any TypeScript backend.

You declare the shape and behavior of your API in one place,
and get an OpenAPI spec, docs, and typed frontend client without a build step.

You can use it as a pluggable, batteries-included web framework for APIs (managing auth, pagination, observability, etc) or sprinkle it on top of your existing API in any framework for better OpenAPI support and/or full-stack typesafety.

You can also opt into Stainless's Stripe-inspired [pristine](#pristine) API design conventions and get rich pagination, consistent errors, field expansion & selection, and normalized caching on the frontend for free.

Stainless draws inspiration with gratitude from tRPC, FastAPI, GraphQL/Relay, and (heavily) from the internal API Framework we worked on at Stripe.

# Getting Started

At the moment, Stainless can be used with Next.js. Support for
standalone and Express apps is coming soon.
We will soon provide a `create-stl-app` API. Until then:

## Installation

```
npm i --save @stl-api/stl @stl-api/next

# Optional plugins:
npm i --save @stl-api/next-auth  # If you are using next-auth
npm i --save @stl-api/prisma     # If you are using Prisma
```

## Create Stainless instance

```ts
// ~/libs/stl.ts

import { makeStl } from "@stl-api/stl";
import { makePrismaPlugin } from "@stl-api/prisma";
import { makeNextPlugin } from "@stl-api/next";
import { makeNextAuthPlugin } from "@stl-api/next-auth";
import { authOptions } from "~/pages/api/auth/[...nextauth]";

export type StlUserContext = {};

const plugins = {
  next: makeNextPlugin(),
  nextAuth: makeNextAuthPlugin({ authOptions }),
  prisma: makePrismaPlugin(),
  currentUser: makeCurrentUserPlugin(),
};

export const stl = makeStl<StlUserContext, typeof plugins>({
  plugins,
});
```

## Create a model

```ts
// ~/api/users/models.ts

import z from "zod";
import prisma from "~/libs/prisma";

export const User = z.response(
  z.object({
    id: z.string().uuid(),

    name: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    username: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    bio: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    email: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    emailVerified: z.date().nullable().optional(),
    image: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    coverImage: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    profileImage: z.string().nullable().optional(),

    hashedPassword: z.string().nullable().optional(),

    createdAt: z.date(),
    updatedAt: z.date(),

    followingIds: z.array(z.string().uuid()),
    hasNotification: z.boolean().nullable().optional(),
    followersCount: z.number().optional(),
  }),
  { prismaModel: prisma.user }
);
```

## Create an endpoint

```ts
// ~/api/users/retrieve.ts

import { stl } from "~/libs/stl";
import z from "zod";
import prisma from "~/libs/prismadb";
import { User } from "./models";

export const retrieve = stl.endpoint({
  endpoint: "get /api/users/{userId}",
  path: z.object({
    userId: z.string(),
  }),
  response: User,
  async handler({ userId }, ctx) {
    const user = await prisma.user.findUnique({
      where: {
        id: userId,
      },
    });
    if (!user) throw new stl.NotFoundError();
    return user;
  },
});
```

## Create a resource

```ts
// ~/api/users/index.ts

import { stl } from "~/libs/stl";
import { retrieve } from "./retrieve";
import { User } from "./models";

export const users = stl.resource({
  summary: "Users",
  models: {
    User,
  },
  actions: {
    retrieve,
  },
});
```

## Create API

```ts
// ~/api/api.ts

import { stl } from "~/libs/stl";
import { users } from "./users";

export const api = stl.api({
  openapi: {
    endpoint: "get /api/openapi",
  },
  resources: {
    users,
  },
});
```

## Add API route

```ts
// ~/app/api/[...catchall]/route.ts

import { api } from "~/api/api";
import { stl } from "~/libs/stl";

const { GET, HEAD, POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE, OPTIONS } =
  stl.plugins.next.appCatchAllRouter(api, {
    catchAllParam: "catchall",
  });

export { GET, HEAD, POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE, OPTIONS };
```

## Create client

```ts
// ~/api/client.ts

import { createClient } from "@stl-api/stl";
import type { api } from "./api";

export const client = createClient<typeof api>("/api");
```

## Use client

```ts
// ~/app/users/[userId]/page.tsx

import * as React from "react";
import client from "~/api/client.ts";
import { useQuery } from "@tanstack/react-query";

export default function UserPage({
  params: { userId },
}: {
  params: { userId: string };
}): React.ReactElement {
  const { status, error, data: user } = useQuery({
    queryKey: [`users/${userId}`],
    queryFn: () => client.users.retrieve(userId),
  });

  if (status === "loading") return <LoadingAlert>Loading user...</LoadingAlert>;
  if (error) return <ErrorAlert error={error} />;

  return <UserDetailsPanel user={user}>
}
```

Commit message:

docs: add ecosystem section to README [ci skip]

packages/stl/README.md, after:

# @stl-api/stl: Stainless server and client framework

Stainless helps you ship quality, typesafe REST APIs from any TypeScript backend.

You declare the shape and behavior of your API in one place,
and get an OpenAPI spec, docs, and typed frontend client without a build step.

You can use it as a pluggable, batteries-included web framework for APIs (managing auth, pagination, observability, etc) or sprinkle it on top of your existing API in any framework for better OpenAPI support and/or full-stack typesafety.

You can also opt into Stainless's Stripe-inspired [pristine](#pristine) API design conventions and get rich pagination, consistent errors, field expansion & selection, and normalized caching on the frontend for free.

Stainless draws inspiration with gratitude from tRPC, FastAPI, GraphQL/Relay, and (heavily) from the internal API Framework we worked on at Stripe.

# Ecosystem

Stainless provides plugins for integrating with the following tools. We plan to add more in the future!

- Netx.js: [`@stl-api/next`](/packages/next)
- NextAuth.js: [`@stl-api/next-auth`](/packages/next-auth)
- Prisma: [`@stl-api/prisma`](/packages/prisma)

# Getting Started

At the moment, Stainless can be used with Next.js. Support for
standalone and Express apps is coming soon.
We will soon provide a `create-stl-app` API. Until then:

## Installation

```
npm i --save @stl-api/stl @stl-api/next

# Optional plugins:
npm i --save @stl-api/next-auth  # If you are using next-auth
npm i --save @stl-api/prisma     # If you are using Prisma
```

## Create Stainless instance

```ts
// ~/libs/stl.ts

import { makeStl } from "@stl-api/stl";
import { makePrismaPlugin } from "@stl-api/prisma";
import { makeNextPlugin } from "@stl-api/next";
import { makeNextAuthPlugin } from "@stl-api/next-auth";
import { authOptions } from "~/pages/api/auth/[...nextauth]";

export type StlUserContext = {};

const plugins = {
  next: makeNextPlugin(),
  nextAuth: makeNextAuthPlugin({ authOptions }),
  prisma: makePrismaPlugin(),
  currentUser: makeCurrentUserPlugin(),
};

export const stl = makeStl<StlUserContext, typeof plugins>({
  plugins,
});
```

## Create a model

```ts
// ~/api/users/models.ts

import z from "zod";
import prisma from "~/libs/prisma";

export const User = z.response(
  z.object({
    id: z.string().uuid(),

    name: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    username: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    bio: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    email: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    emailVerified: z.date().nullable().optional(),
    image: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    coverImage: z.string().nullable().optional(),
    profileImage: z.string().nullable().optional(),

    hashedPassword: z.string().nullable().optional(),

    createdAt: z.date(),
    updatedAt: z.date(),

    followingIds: z.array(z.string().uuid()),
    hasNotification: z.boolean().nullable().optional(),
    followersCount: z.number().optional(),
  }),
  { prismaModel: prisma.user }
);
```

## Create an endpoint

```ts
// ~/api/users/retrieve.ts

import { stl } from "~/libs/stl";
import z from "zod";
import prisma from "~/libs/prismadb";
import { User } from "./models";

export const retrieve = stl.endpoint({
  endpoint: "get /api/users/{userId}",
  path: z.object({
    userId: z.string(),
  }),
  response: User,
  async handler({ userId }, ctx) {
    const user = await prisma.user.findUnique({
      where: {
        id: userId,
      },
    });
    if (!user) throw new stl.NotFoundError();
    return user;
  },
});
```

## Create a resource

```ts
// ~/api/users/index.ts

import { stl } from "~/libs/stl";
import { retrieve } from "./retrieve";
import { User } from "./models";

export const users = stl.resource({
  summary: "Users",
  models: {
    User,
  },
  actions: {
    retrieve,
  },
});
```

## Create API

```ts
// ~/api/api.ts

import { stl } from "~/libs/stl";
import { users } from "./users";

export const api = stl.api({
  openapi: {
    endpoint: "get /api/openapi",
  },
  resources: {
    users,
  },
});
```

## Add API route

```ts
// ~/app/api/[...catchall]/route.ts

import { api } from "~/api/api";
import { stl } from "~/libs/stl";

const { GET, HEAD, POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE, OPTIONS } =
  stl.plugins.next.appCatchAllRouter(api, {
    catchAllParam: "catchall",
  });

export { GET, HEAD, POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE, OPTIONS };
```

## Create client

```ts
// ~/api/client.ts

import { createClient } from "@stl-api/stl";
import type { api } from "./api";

export const client = createClient<typeof api>("/api");
```

## Use client

```ts
// ~/app/users/[userId]/page.tsx

import * as React from "react";
import client from "~/api/client.ts";
import { useQuery } from "@tanstack/react-query";

export default function UserPage({
  params: { userId },
}: {
  params: { userId: string };
}): React.ReactElement {
  const { status, error, data: user } = useQuery({
    queryKey: [`users/${userId}`],
    queryFn: () => client.users.retrieve(userId),
  });

  if (status === "loading") return <LoadingAlert>Loading user...</LoadingAlert>;
  if (error) return <ErrorAlert error={error} />;

  return <UserDetailsPanel user={user}>
}
```
